p8105_hw2_lz2949.md, before:

p8105_hw2_lz2949
================
Longyi Zhao
2023-09-27

``` r
library(tidyverse)
```

    ## ── Attaching core tidyverse packages ──────────────────────── tidyverse 2.0.0 ──
    ## ✔ dplyr     1.1.3     ✔ readr     2.1.4
    ## ✔ forcats   1.0.0     ✔ stringr   1.5.0
    ## ✔ ggplot2   3.4.3     ✔ tibble    3.2.1
    ## ✔ lubridate 1.9.2     ✔ tidyr     1.3.0
    ## ✔ purrr     1.0.2     
    ## ── Conflicts ────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse_conflicts() ──
    ## ✖ dplyr::filter() masks stats::filter()
    ## ✖ dplyr::lag()    masks stats::lag()
    ## ℹ Use the conflicted package (<http://conflicted.r-lib.org/>) to force all conflicts to become errors

## Problem 1

import data

``` r
pols_df = 
  read_csv("./data/pols-month.csv") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  separate(mon, into = c("year", "month","day"), sep=c(4,7)) |>
  mutate (
    month = 
    case_match(
      month, 
      "-01" ~ "January",
      "-02" ~ "Febuary",
      "-03" ~ "March",
      "-04" ~ "April", 
      "-05" ~ "May",
      "-06" ~ "June",
      "-07" ~ "July",
      "-08" ~ "August",
      "-09" ~ "September",
      "-10" ~ "October",
      "-11" ~ "November",
      "-12" ~ "December",
    )
  ) |>
  mutate (
    president = 
    case_match(
      prez_gop,
    0 ~ "dem", 
    1 ~ "gop", 
    2 ~ "gop"
    )
  ) |>
  subset(select = -c(day, prez_dem, prez_gop))
```

    ## Rows: 822 Columns: 9
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl  (8): prez_gop, gov_gop, sen_gop, rep_gop, prez_dem, gov_dem, sen_dem, r...
    ## date (1): mon
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

clean data in snp.csv

``` r
snp_df = 
  read_csv("./data/snp.csv") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  separate(date, into = c("month", "day", "year"), sep = "/") |> # drop day
  subset(select = -day) |>
  mutate (
    month = 
    case_match(
      month, 
      "1" ~ "January",
      "2" ~ "Febuary",
      "3" ~ "March",
      "4" ~ "April", 
      "5" ~ "May",
      "6" ~ "June",
      "7" ~ "July",
      "8" ~ "August",
      "9" ~ "September",
      "10" ~ "October",
      "11" ~ "November",
      "12" ~ "December",
    ))
```

    ## Rows: 787 Columns: 2
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (1): date
    ## dbl (1): close
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
# add 19 when num(year) is greater than 19, else add 20
snp_df$year = ifelse(as.numeric(snp_df$year)>= 50, paste0("19",snp_df$year), paste0("20", snp_df$year))
# switch the order between year and month 
snp_df = snp_df[, c("year", "month", "close")]
```

tidy up unemployment data

``` r
unemp_df = 
  read_csv("./data/unemployment.csv") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> # switching from wide to long 
  pivot_longer(jan:dec,
               names_to = "month",
               values_to = "unemployment rate") |>
  mutate (
    year = as.character(year),
    month = 
    case_match(
      month, 
      "jan" ~ "January",
      "feb" ~ "Febuary",
      "mar" ~ "March",
      "apr" ~ "April", 
      "may" ~ "May",
      "jun" ~ "June",
      "jul" ~ "July",
      "aug" ~ "August",
      "sep" ~ "September",
      "oct" ~ "October",
      "nov" ~ "November",
      "dec" ~ "December",
    ))
```

    ## Rows: 68 Columns: 13
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl (13): Year, Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct, Nov, Dec
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

join the datasets by merging snp into pols, and merging unemployment
into results

left-join snp into pols, then add unemployment data as well

``` r
snp_pols_data = 
  left_join(pols_df, snp_df, by = c("year", "month"))

merged_data = left_join(snp_pols_data, unemp_df, by = c("year", "month"))
```

write a short paragraph about these datasets. explain briefly what each
dataset contained, and describe the resulting dataset (dimention, range
of years, names of key variables)

## Problem 2

``` r
library(readxl) # read Mr. Trash Wheel data
MtrashW_df = 
  read_excel("./data/202207 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", range = "A2:N547") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  mutate(
    homes_powered = (
      weight_tons*500/30
    )
  )

MtrashW_df$Name = "Mr. Trash Wheel"
```

use similar process to import, clean, and organize data for Professor
Trash Wheel and Gwynnda.

``` r
PtrashW_df = 
  read_excel("./data/202207 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", range = "A2:M96") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
    mutate(
    year = as.character(year),
    homes_powered = (
      weight_tons*500/30
    )
  )
PtrashW_df$Name = "Professor Trash Wheel"


Gwynnda_df = 
  read_excel("./data/202207 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel", range = "A2:K108") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
    mutate(
    year = as.character(year),
    homes_powered = (
      weight_tons*500/30
    )
  )
Gwynnda_df$Name = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel"
```

Combine these two dataset with Mr. Trash Wheel. Use the bind_rows ?

``` r
trash_tidy = 
  bind_rows (MtrashW_df, PtrashW_df, Gwynnda_df) |>
  janitor::clean_names() 
# move trash wheel name to the first column 
trash_tidy = trash_tidy[, c("name", setdiff(names(trash_tidy), "name"))]
```

write a paragraph about these data

## Problem 3

import, clean, and tidy baseline demographic database

``` r
baseline_df = 
  read_csv("./data_mci/MCI_baseline.csv", skip = 1) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> # convert sex/apoe4 from number to name 
mutate ( 
    sex = case_match(
      sex,
      1 ~ "male", 
      0 ~ "female"
    ),
    apoe4 = case_match(
      apoe4,
      1 ~ "APOE4 carrier",
      0 ~ "APOE4 non-carrier"
    )
  )  # remove participants without MCI value
```

    ## Rows: 483 Columns: 6
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (1): Age at onset
    ## dbl (5): ID, Current Age, Sex, Education, apoe4
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
c_baseline_df = filter(baseline_df, age_at_onset != ".")
```

discuss the important steps in the import process and relevant features
of the dataset

Import, clean and tidt longitudinally dataset

``` r
amyloid_df = 
  read_csv("./data_mci/mci_amyloid.csv", skip = 1) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  rename(id = study_id) # change study_id to id to match column names to baseline_df
```

    ## Rows: 487 Columns: 6
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (5): Baseline, Time 2, Time 4, Time 6, Time 8
    ## dbl (1): Study ID
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

comment on steps on the import process and features of the dataset

check whether some participants appear in only the baseline or amyloid
dataset (study id)

``` r
same_id_baseline = sum(baseline_df$id %in% amyloid_df$id) # check # of id in baseline apper in amyloid
```

comment

combine two dataset so who appear in both datasets are retained

``` r
m_amybase = merge(c_baseline_df, amyloid_df, by = "id")
```

comments

export combined dataset as CSV to the data_mci directory

``` r
write_csv(m_amybase, "data_mci/m_amybase.csv")
```

Commit message:

add some comments in p2 and p3

p8105_hw2_lz2949.md, after:

p8105_hw2_lz2949
================
Longyi Zhao
2023-09-27

``` r
library(tidyverse)
```

    ## ── Attaching core tidyverse packages ──────────────────────── tidyverse 2.0.0 ──
    ## ✔ dplyr     1.1.3     ✔ readr     2.1.4
    ## ✔ forcats   1.0.0     ✔ stringr   1.5.0
    ## ✔ ggplot2   3.4.3     ✔ tibble    3.2.1
    ## ✔ lubridate 1.9.2     ✔ tidyr     1.3.0
    ## ✔ purrr     1.0.2     
    ## ── Conflicts ────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse_conflicts() ──
    ## ✖ dplyr::filter() masks stats::filter()
    ## ✖ dplyr::lag()    masks stats::lag()
    ## ℹ Use the conflicted package (<http://conflicted.r-lib.org/>) to force all conflicts to become errors

## Problem 1

import data

``` r
pols_df = 
  read_csv("./data/pols-month.csv") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  separate(mon, into = c("year", "month","day"), sep=c(4,7)) |>
  mutate (
    month = 
    case_match(
      month, 
      "-01" ~ "January",
      "-02" ~ "Febuary",
      "-03" ~ "March",
      "-04" ~ "April", 
      "-05" ~ "May",
      "-06" ~ "June",
      "-07" ~ "July",
      "-08" ~ "August",
      "-09" ~ "September",
      "-10" ~ "October",
      "-11" ~ "November",
      "-12" ~ "December",
    )
  ) |>
  mutate (
    president = 
    case_match(
      prez_gop,
    0 ~ "dem", 
    1 ~ "gop", 
    2 ~ "gop"
    )
  ) |>
  subset(select = -c(day, prez_dem, prez_gop))
```

    ## Rows: 822 Columns: 9
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl  (8): prez_gop, gov_gop, sen_gop, rep_gop, prez_dem, gov_dem, sen_dem, r...
    ## date (1): mon
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

clean data in snp.csv

``` r
snp_df = 
  read_csv("./data/snp.csv") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> 
  separate(date, into = c("month", "day", "year"), sep = "/") |> # drop day
  subset(select = -day) |>
  mutate (
    month = 
    case_match(
      month, 
      "1" ~ "January",
      "2" ~ "Febuary",
      "3" ~ "March",
      "4" ~ "April", 
      "5" ~ "May",
      "6" ~ "June",
      "7" ~ "July",
      "8" ~ "August",
      "9" ~ "September",
      "10" ~ "October",
      "11" ~ "November",
      "12" ~ "December",
    ))
```

    ## Rows: 787 Columns: 2
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (1): date
    ## dbl (1): close
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
# add 19 when num(year) is greater than 19, else add 20
snp_df$year = ifelse(as.numeric(snp_df$year)>= 50, paste0("19",snp_df$year), paste0("20", snp_df$year))
# switch the order between year and month 
snp_df = snp_df[, c("year", "month", "close")]
```

tidy up unemployment data

``` r
unemp_df = 
  read_csv("./data/unemployment.csv") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> # switching from wide to long 
  pivot_longer(jan:dec,
               names_to = "month",
               values_to = "unemployment rate") |>
  mutate (
    year = as.character(year),
    month = 
    case_match(
      month, 
      "jan" ~ "January",
      "feb" ~ "Febuary",
      "mar" ~ "March",
      "apr" ~ "April", 
      "may" ~ "May",
      "jun" ~ "June",
      "jul" ~ "July",
      "aug" ~ "August",
      "sep" ~ "September",
      "oct" ~ "October",
      "nov" ~ "November",
      "dec" ~ "December",
    ))
```

    ## Rows: 68 Columns: 13
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## dbl (13): Year, Jan, Feb, Mar, Apr, May, Jun, Jul, Aug, Sep, Oct, Nov, Dec
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

join the datasets by merging snp into pols, and merging unemployment
into results

left-join snp into pols, then add unemployment data as well

``` r
snp_pols_data = 
  left_join(pols_df, snp_df, by = c("year", "month"))

merged_data = left_join(snp_pols_data, unemp_df, by = c("year", "month"))
```

write a short paragraph about these datasets. explain briefly what each
dataset contained, and describe the resulting dataset (dimention, range
of years, names of key variables)

## Problem 2

``` r
library(readxl) # read Mr. Trash Wheel data
MtrashW_df = 
  read_excel("./data/202207 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel", range = "A2:N547") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  mutate(
    homes_powered = (
      weight_tons*500/30
    )
  )

MtrashW_df$Name = "Mr. Trash Wheel"
```

use similar process to import, clean, and organize data for Professor
Trash Wheel and Gwynnda.

``` r
PtrashW_df = 
  read_excel("./data/202207 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = "Professor Trash Wheel", range = "A2:M96") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
    mutate(
    year = as.character(year),
    homes_powered = (
      weight_tons*500/30
    )
  )
PtrashW_df$Name = "Professor Trash Wheel"


Gwynnda_df = 
  read_excel("./data/202207 Trash Wheel Collection Data.xlsx", sheet = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel", range = "A2:K108") |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
    mutate(
    year = as.character(year),
    homes_powered = (
      weight_tons*500/30
    )
  )
Gwynnda_df$Name = "Gwynnda Trash Wheel"
```

Combine these two dataset with Mr. Trash Wheel.

``` r
trash_tidy = 
  bind_rows (MtrashW_df, PtrashW_df, Gwynnda_df) |>
  janitor::clean_names() 
# move trash wheel name to the first column 
trash_tidy = trash_tidy[, c("name", setdiff(names(trash_tidy), "name"))]
```

Description: There are three datasets in this problem. The first one is
called Mr. Trash Wheel, it has 15 variables and it includes data of 545
dumpsters. The first one is called Professor Trash Wheel, it has 14
variables and it includes data of 94 dumpsters. Similarly, the third one
is called Gwynnda Trash Wheel, it has 12 variables and it includes data
of 106 dumpsters. Some of their collected trash are plastic_bottles,
polystyrene, cigarette_butts.

The total weight of trash collected by Professor Trash Wheel is 190.12
tons. The total number of cigarette butts collected by Gwynnda in July
of 2021 is 1.63^{4}.

## Problem 3

import, clean, and tidy baseline demographic database

``` r
baseline_df = 
  read_csv("./data_mci/MCI_baseline.csv", skip = 1) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |> # convert sex/apoe4 from number to name 
mutate ( 
    sex = case_match(
      sex,
      1 ~ "male", 
      0 ~ "female"
    ),
    apoe4 = case_match(
      apoe4,
      1 ~ "APOE4 carrier",
      0 ~ "APOE4 non-carrier"
    )
  )  # remove participants without MCI value
```

    ## Rows: 483 Columns: 6
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (1): Age at onset
    ## dbl (5): ID, Current Age, Sex, Education, apoe4
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

``` r
c_baseline_df = filter(baseline_df, age_at_onset != ".")
```

Description: To import the baseline dataset, read_csv function is used
and skip = 1 is used to skip the explanation line above header. Mutate
function is then used to change sex values to male or female and apoe4
values to carrier or non-carrier. Finally, the filter function is used
to filter out those who do not have MCI values recorded.

The total number of participants is 483. Among those, 97 developed MCI.
The average baseline age of those 97 patients are 70.26. In this study,
30 female patients are apoe4 carrier, which counts for 30.93% proportion
of total patients.

Import, clean and tidt longitudinally dataset

``` r
amyloid_df = 
  read_csv("./data_mci/mci_amyloid.csv", skip = 1) |>
  janitor::clean_names() |>
  rename(id = study_id) # change study_id to id to match column names to baseline_df
```

    ## Rows: 487 Columns: 6
    ## ── Column specification ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
    ## Delimiter: ","
    ## chr (5): Baseline, Time 2, Time 4, Time 6, Time 8
    ## dbl (1): Study ID
    ## 
    ## ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
    ## ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

comment on steps on the import process and features of the dataset

check whether some participants appear in only the baseline or amyloid
dataset (study id)

``` r
same_id_baseline = sum(baseline_df$id %in% amyloid_df$id) # check # of id in baseline apper in amyloid
```

comment

combine two dataset so who appear in both datasets are retained

``` r
m_amybase = merge(c_baseline_df, amyloid_df, by = "id")
```

comments

export combined dataset as CSV to the data_mci directory

``` r
write_csv(m_amybase, "data_mci/m_amybase.csv")
```
